22 - oxacalcitriol suppresses secondary hyperparathyroidism without inducing low bone turnover in dogs with renal failure .
BACKGROUND : Calcitriol therapy suppresses serum levels of parathyroid hormone ( PTH ) in patients with renal failure but has several drawbacks , including hypercalcemia and / or marked suppression of bone turnover , which may lead to adynamic bone disease .
A new vitamin D analogue , 22 - oxacalcitriol ( OCT ) , has been shown to have promising characteristics .
This study was undertaken to determine the effects of OCT on serum PTH levels and bone turnover in states of normal or impaired renal function .
METHODS : Sixty dogs were either nephrectomized ( Nx , N = 38 ) or sham - operated ( Sham , N = 22 ) .
The animals received supplemental phosphate to enhance PTH secretion .
Fourteen weeks after the start of phosphate supplementation , half of the Nx and Sham dogs received doses of OCT ( three times per week ) ; the other half were given vehicle for 60 weeks .
Thereafter , the treatment modalities for a subset of animals were crossed over for an additional eight months .
Biochemical and hormonal indices of calcium and bone metabolism were measured throughout the study , and bone biopsies were done at baseline , 60 weeks after OCT or vehicle treatment , and at the end of the crossover period .
RESULTS : In Nx dogs , OCT significantly decreased serum PTH levels soon after the induction of renal insufficiency .
In long - standing secondary hyperparathyroidism , OCT ( 0 . 03 microg / kg ) stabilized serum PTH levels during the first months .
Serum PTH levels rose thereafter , but the rise was less pronounced compared with baseline than the rise seen in Nx control .
These effects were accompanied by episodes of hypercalcemia and hyperphosphatemia .
In animals with normal renal function , OCT induced a transient decrease in serum PTH levels at a dose of 0 . 1 microg / kg , which was not sustained with lowering of the doses .
In Nx dogs , OCT reversed abnormal bone formation , such as woven osteoid and fibrosis , but did not significantly alter the level of bone turnover .
In addition , OCT improved mineralization lag time , ( that is , the rate at which osteoid mineralizes ) in both Nx and Sham dogs .
CONCLUSIONS : These results indicate that even though OCT does not completely prevent the occurrence of hypercalcemia in experimental dogs with renal insufficiency , it may be of use in the management of secondary hyperparathyroidism because it does not induce low bone turnover and , therefore , does not increase the risk of adynamic bone disease .