Probing peripheral and central cholinergic system responses .
OBJECTIVE : The pharmacological response to drugs that act on the cholinergic system of the iris has been used to predict deficits in central cholinergic functioning due to diseases such as Alzheimer 's disease , yet correlations between central and peripheral responses have not been properly studied .
This study assessed the effect of normal aging on ( 1 ) the tropicamide - induced increase in pupil diameter , and ( 2 ) the reversal of this effect with pilocarpine .
Scopolamine was used as a positive control to detect age - dependent changes in central cholinergic functioning in the elderly .
DESIGN : Randomized double - blind controlled trial .
PARTICIPANTS : Ten healthy elderly ( mean age 70 ) and 9 young ( mean age 33 ) volunteers .
INTERVENTIONS : Pupil diameter was monitored using a computerized infrared pupillometer over 4 hours .
The study involved 4 sessions .
In 1 session , tropicamide ( 20 microL , 0 . 01 % ) was administered to one eye and placebo to the other .
In another session , tropicamide ( 20 microL , 0 . 01 % ) was administered to both eyes , followed 23 minutes later by the application of pilocarpine ( 20 microL , 0 . 1 % ) to one eye and placebo to the other .
All eye drops were given in a randomized order .
In 2 separate sessions , a single dose of scopolamine ( 0 . 5 mg , intravenously ) or placebo was administered , and the effects on word recall were measured using the Buschke Selective Reminding Test over 2 hours .
OUTCOME MEASURES : Pupil size at time points after administration of tropicamide and pilocarpine ; scopolamine - induced impairment in word recall .
RESULTS : There was no significant difference between elderly and young volunteers in pupillary response to tropicamide at any time point ( p > 0 . 05 ) .
The elderly group had a significantly greater pilocarpine - induced net decrease in pupil size 85 , 125 , 165 and 215 minutes after administration , compared with the young group ( p < 0 . 05 ) .
Compared with the young group , the elderly group had greater scopolamine - induced impairment in word recall 60 , 90 and 120 minutes after administration ( p < 0 . 05 ) .
CONCLUSION : There is an age - related pupillary response to pilocarpine that is not found with tropicamide .
Thus , pilocarpine may be useful to assess variations in central cholinergic function in elderly patients .