Evidence of functional somatotopy in GPi from results of pallidotomy .
The objective of this study was to explore the functional anatomy of the globus pallidus internus ( GPi ) by studying the effects of unilateral pallidotomy on parkinsonian ' off ' signs and levodopa - induced dyskinesias ( LID ) .
We found significant positive correlations between the preoperative levodopa responsiveness of motor signs and the levodopa responsiveness of scores in timed tests ( Core Assessment Program for Intracerebral Transplantations ) in the contralateral limbs and the improvement in these scores after surgery , whereas there was no correlation with the improvement in LID .
We also found a highly significant correlation ( P : < 0 . 0001 , r = 0 . 8 ) between the volume of the ventral lesion in the GPi and the improvement in LID in the contralateral limbs , whereas there was no correlation between the ventral volume and the improvement in parkinsonian ' off ' signs .
The volumes of the total lesion cylinder and the dorsal lesion did not correlate with the outcome of either dyskinesias or parkinsonian ' off ' signs .
The differential predictive value of levodopa responsiveness for the outcome of parkinsonian ' off ' signs and LID and the different correlations of ventral lesion volume with dyskinesias and parkinsonian ' off ' signs indicate that different anatomical or pathophysiological substrates may be responsible for the generation of parkinsonian ' off ' signs and dyskinesias .
Whereas cells in a wider area of the GPi may be implicated in parkinsonism , the ventral GPi seems to be crucial for the manifestation of LID .
We suggest that our observations are additional proof of the functional somatotopy of the systems within the GPi that mediate parkinsonism and dyskinesias , especially along the dorsoventral trajectory used in pallidotomy .
The outcome of pallidotomy in which the lesion involves the ventral and dorsal GPi could be the net effect of alteration in the activity of pathways which mediate different symptoms , and hence could be variable .