Can lidocaine reduce succinylcholine induced postoperative myalgia ?
This study was undertaken to determine the effect of lidocaine pretreatment on reduction of succinylcholine - induced myalgia in patients undergoing general anesthesia for gynecological surgery .
One hundred and thirty - five patients were assigned to one of three groups in a prospective , double blind , randomized manner .
Group PS , the control group , received normal saline and succinylcholine 1 . 5 mg x kg ( - 1 ) ; Group LS , lidocaine 1 . 5 mg x kg ( - 1 ) and succinylcholine 1 . 5 mg x kg ( - 1 ) ; Group PR , normal saline and rocuronium 0 . 6 mg x kg ( - 1 ) .
Morphine 0 . 1 mg x kg ( - 1 ) iv was given for premedication and all patients were monitored with a noninvasive blood pressure monitor , ECG and pulse oximetry .
Anesthesia was induced with 5 mg . kg ( - 1 ) thiopental iv .
followed by succinylcholine ( Group PS , LS ) or rocuronium ( Group PR ) for tracheal intubation .
Following administration of these agents , the presence , and degree of fasciculation were assessed visually on a four point scale by one investigator who was blinded to the drug administered .
The blood pressure and heart rate of each patient were monitored on nine occasions .
Twenty - four hours later , any myalgia experienced was assessed according to a structured questionaire and graded by a four point scale by one investigator blinded to the intraoperative management .
The results indicate that muscle fasciculation was not found in Group PR while the patients in Group LS had a lower incidence of muscle fasciculation than those in Group PS ( p < 0 . 001 ) .
At 24 h , the incidence of myalgia was higher in Group PS than in Group LS and PR ( p < 0 . 05 ) .
A correlation was not found between the incidence of myalgia and the occurrence of muscle fasciculation .
The changes in systolic and diastolic blood pressure and heart rate were not significant among the three groups .
In conclusion , where succinylcholine is used , lidocaine is proven to be the useful pretreatment agent for the reduction of postoperative myalgia .