Mitochondrial DNA and its respiratory chain products are defective in doxorubicin nephrosis .
BACKGROUND : Doxorubicin induces a self - perpetuating nephropathy characterized by early glomerular and late - onset tubular lesions in rats .
We investigated the potential role of mitochondrial injury in the onset of these lesions .
METHODS : Rats were treated with intravenous doxorubicin ( 1 mg kg ( - 1 ) week ( - 1 ) ) for 7 weeks and were sacrificed either 1 week ( ' short - term ' ) or 30 weeks ( ' long - term ' ) following the last dose .
Additional rats received a single dose either 6 days or 2 h prior to euthanasia .
All rats were killed at 48 weeks of age .
Glomerular and tubular injury was monitored and correlated to the activity or expression of respiratory chain components .
Finally , we quantified both nuclear and mitochondrial DNA ( mtDNA ) as well as superoxide production and the 4834 base pair ' common ' mtDNA deletion .
RESULTS : The ' long - term ' group had significant glomerular and tubular lesions , depressed activities of mtDNA - encoded NADH dehydrogenase and cytochrome - c oxidase ( COX ) and increased citrate synthase activity .
In addition , expression of the mtDNA - encoded COX subunit I was reduced and mtDNA levels were decreased .
In ' short - term ' rats , there were fewer tubular lesions , but similar numbers of glomerular lesions activity .
Among all animals , glomerular and tubular injury were inversely correlated with mtDNA levels , mtDNA - encoded respiratory chain activities and with the expression of the mtDNA - encoded respiratory chain subunit COX - I .
Injury was positively correlated with superoxide production and the activities of nucleus - encoded mitochondrial or cytoplasmic enzymes .
Kidneys from the ' long - term ' group showed more mtDNA deletions than in ' short - term ' animals and these were not observed in the other groups .
CONCLUSIONS : These results suggest an important role for quantitative and qualitative mtDNA alterations through the reduction of mtDNA - encoded respiratory chain function and induction of superoxide in doxorubicin - induced renal lesions .