Increased expression and apical targeting of renal ENaC subunits in puromycin aminonucleoside - induced nephrotic syndrome in rats .
Nephrotic syndrome is often accompanied by sodium retention and generalized edema .
However , the molecular basis for the decreased renal sodium excretion remains undefined .
We hypothesized that epithelial Na channel ( ENaC ) subunit dysregulation may be responsible for the increased sodium retention .
An experimental group of rats was treated with puromycin aminonucleoside ( PAN ; 180 mg / kg iv ) , whereas the control group received only vehicle .
After 7 days , PAN treatment induced significant proteinuria , hypoalbuminemia , decreased urinary sodium excretion , and extensive ascites .
The protein abundance of alpha - ENaC and beta - ENaC was increased in the inner stripe of the outer medulla ( ISOM ) and in the inner medulla ( IM ) but was not altered in the cortex .
gamma - ENaC abundance was increased in the cortex , ISOM , and IM .
Immunoperoxidase brightfield - and laser - scanning confocal fluorescence microscopy demonstrated increased targeting of alpha - ENaC , beta - ENaC , and gamma - ENaC subunits to the apical plasma membrane in the distal convoluted tubule ( DCT2 ) , connecting tubule , and cortical and medullary collecting duct segments .
Immunoelectron microscopy further revealed an increased labeling of alpha - ENaC in the apical plasma membrane of cortical collecting duct principal cells of PAN - treated rats , indicating enhanced apical targeting of alpha - ENaC subunits .
In contrast , the protein abundances of Na ( + ) / H ( + ) exchanger type 3 ( NHE3 ) , Na ( + ) - K ( + ) - 2Cl ( - ) cotransporter ( BSC - 1 ) , and thiazide - sensitive Na ( + ) - Cl ( - ) cotransporter ( TSC ) were decreased .
Moreover , the abundance of the alpha ( 1 ) - subunit of the Na - K - ATPase was decreased in the cortex and ISOM , but it remained unchanged in the IM .
In conclusion , the increased or sustained expression of ENaC subunits combined with increased apical targeting in the DCT2 , connecting tubule , and collecting duct are likely to play a role in the sodium retention associated with PAN - induced nephrotic syndrome .
The decreased abundance of NHE3 , BSC - 1 , TSC , and Na - K - ATPase may play a compensatory role to promote sodium excretion .