Dexrazoxane protects against myelosuppression from the DNA cleavage - enhancing drugs etoposide and daunorubicin but not doxorubicin .
PURPOSE : The anthracyclines daunorubicin and doxorubicin and the epipodophyllotoxin etoposide are potent DNA cleavage - enhancing drugs that are widely used in clinical oncology ; however , myelosuppression and cardiac toxicity limit their use .
Dexrazoxane ( ICRF - 187 ) is recommended for protection against anthracycline - induced cardiotoxicity .
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN : Because of their widespread use , the hematologic toxicity following coadministration of dexrazoxane and these three structurally different DNA cleavage enhancers was investigated : Sensitivity of human and murine blood progenitor cells to etoposide , daunorubicin , and doxorubicin + / - dexrazoxane was determined in granulocyte - macrophage colony forming assays .
Likewise , in vivo , B6D2F1 mice were treated with etoposide , daunorubicin , and doxorubicin , with or without dexrazoxane over a wide range of doses : posttreatment , a full hematologic evaluation was done .
RESULTS : Nontoxic doses of dexrazoxane reduced myelosuppression and weight loss from daunorubicin and etoposide in mice and antagonized their antiproliferative effects in the colony assay ; however , dexrazoxane neither reduced myelosuppression , weight loss , nor the in vitro cytotoxicity from doxorubicin .
CONCLUSION : Although our findings support the observation that dexrazoxane reduces neither hematologic activity nor antitumor activity from doxorubicin clinically , the potent antagonism of daunorubicin activity raises concern ; a possible interference with anticancer efficacy certainly would call for renewed attention .
Our data also suggest that significant etoposide dose escalation is perhaps possible by the use of dexrazoxane .
Clinical trials in patients with brain metastases combining dexrazoxane and high doses of etoposide is ongoing with the aim of improving efficacy without aggravating hematologic toxicity .
If successful , this represents an exciting mechanism for pharmacologic regulation of side effects from cytotoxic chemotherapy .