High dose dexmedetomidine as the sole sedative for pediatric MRI .
OBJECTIVE : This large - scale retrospective review evaluates the sedation profile of dexmedetomidine .
AIM : To determine the hemodynamic responses , efficacy and adverse events associated with the use of high dose dexmedetomidine as the sole sedative for magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) studies .
BACKGROUND : Dexmedetomidine has been used at our institution since 2005 to provide sedation for pediatric radiological imaging studies .
Over time , an effective protocol utilizing high dose dexmedetomidine as the sole sedative agent has evolved .
METHODS / MATERIALS : As part of the ongoing Quality Assurance process , data on all sedations are reviewed monthly and protocols modified as needed .
Data were analyzed from all 747 consecutive patients who received dexmedetomidine for MRI sedation from April 2005 to April 2007 .
RESULTS : Since 2005 , the 10 - min loading dose of our dexmedetomidine protocol increased from 2 to 3 microg . kg ( - 1 ) , and the infusion rate increased from 1 to 1 . 5 to 2 microg . kg ( - 1 ) . h ( - 1 ) .
The current sedation protocol progressively increased the rate of successful sedation ( able to complete the imaging study ) when using dexmedetomidine alone from 91 . 8 % to 97 . 6 % ( P = 0 . 009 ) , reducing the requirement for adjuvant pentobarbital in the event of sedation failure with dexmedetomidine alone and decreased the mean recovery time by 10 min ( P < 0 . 001 ) .
Although dexmedetomidine sedation was associated with a 16 % incidence of bradycardia , all concomitant mean arterial blood pressures were within 20 % of age - adjusted normal range and oxygen saturations were 95 % or higher .
CONCLUSION : Dexmedetomidine in high doses provides adequate sedation for pediatric MRI studies .
While use of high dose dexmedetomidine is associated with decreases in heart rate and blood pressure outside the established ' awake ' norms , this deviation is generally within 20 % of norms , and is not associated with adverse sequelae .
Dexmedetomidine is useful as the sole sedative for pediatric MRI .