The protective role of Nrf2 in streptozotocin - induced diabetic nephropathy .
OBJECTIVE : Diabetic nephropathy is one of the major causes of renal failure , which is accompanied by the production of reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) .
Nrf2 is the primary transcription factor that controls the antioxidant response essential for maintaining cellular redox homeostasis .
Here , we report our findings demonstrating a protective role of Nrf2 against diabetic nephropathy .
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS : We explore the protective role of Nrf2 against diabetic nephropathy using human kidney biopsy tissues from diabetic nephropathy patients , a streptozotocin - induced diabetic nephropathy model in Nrf2 ( - / - ) mice , and cultured human mesangial cells .
RESULTS : The glomeruli of human diabetic nephropathy patients were under oxidative stress and had elevated Nrf2 levels .
In the animal study , Nrf2 was demonstrated to be crucial in ameliorating streptozotocin - induced renal damage .
This is evident by Nrf2 ( - / - ) mice having higher ROS production and suffering from greater oxidative DNA damage and renal injury compared with Nrf2 ( + / + ) mice .
Mechanistic studies in both in vivo and in vitro systems showed that the Nrf2 - mediated protection against diabetic nephropathy is , at least , partially through inhibition of transforming growth factor - beta1 ( TGF - beta1 ) and reduction of extracellular matrix production .
In human renal mesangial cells , high glucose induced ROS production and activated expression of Nrf2 and its downstream genes .
Furthermore , activation or overexpression of Nrf2 inhibited the promoter activity of TGF - beta1 in a dose - dependent manner , whereas knockdown of Nrf2 by siRNA enhanced TGF - beta1 transcription and fibronectin production .
CONCLUSIONS : This work clearly indicates a protective role of Nrf2 in diabetic nephropathy , suggesting that dietary or therapeutic activation of Nrf2 could be used as a strategy to prevent or slow down the progression of diabetic nephropathy .