Risk of nephropathy after consumption of nonionic contrast media by children undergoing cardiac angiography : a prospective study .
Despite increasing reports on nonionic contrast media - induced nephropathy ( CIN ) in hospitalized adult patients during cardiac procedures , the studies in pediatrics are limited , with even less focus on possible predisposing factors and preventive measures for patients undergoing cardiac angiography .
This prospective study determined the incidence of CIN for two nonionic contrast media ( CM ) , iopromide and iohexol , among 80 patients younger than 18 years and compared the rates for this complication in relation to the type and dosage of CM and the presence of cyanosis .
The 80 patients in the study consecutively received either iopromide ( group A , n = 40 ) or iohexol ( group B , n = 40 ) .
Serum sodium ( Na ) , potassium ( K ) , and creatinine ( Cr ) were measured 24 h before angiography as baseline values , then measured again at 12 - , 24 - , and 48 - h intervals after CM use .
Urine samples for Na and Cr also were checked at the same intervals .
Risk of renal failure , Injury to the kidney , Failure of kidney function , Loss of kidney function , and End - stage renal damage ( RIFLE criteria ) were used to define CIN and its incidence in the study population .
Accordingly , among the 15 CIN patients ( 18 . 75 % ) , 7 . 5 % of the patients in group A had increased risk and 3 . 75 % had renal injury , whereas 5 % of group B had increased risk and 2 . 5 % had renal injury .
Whereas 33 . 3 % of the patients with CIN were among those who received the proper dosage of CM , the percentage increased to 66 . 6 % among those who received larger doses , with a significant difference in the incidence of CIN related to the different dosages of CM ( p = 0 . 014 ) .
Among the 15 patients with CIN , 6 had cyanotic congenital heart diseases , but the incidence did not differ significantly from that for the noncyanotic patients ( p = 0 . 243 ) .
Although clinically silent , CIN is not rare in pediatrics .
The incidence depends on dosage but not on the type of consumed nonionic CM , nor on the presence of cyanosis , and although CIN usually is reversible , more concern is needed for the prevention of such a complication in children .