Multicenter , double - blind , multiple - dose , parallel - groups efficacy and safety trial of azelastine , chlorpheniramine , and placebo in the treatment of spring allergic rhinitis .
Azelastine , a novel antiallergic medication , was compared with chlorpheniramine maleate and placebo for efficacy and safety in the treatment of spring allergic rhinitis in a multicenter , double - blind , multiple - dose , parallel - groups study .
One hundred fifty - five subjects participated .
Subjects ranged in age from 18 to 60 years of age and had at least a 2 - year history of spring allergic rhinitis , confirmed by positive skin test to spring aeroallergens .
Medications were given four times daily ; the azelastine groups received 0 . 5 , 1 . 0 , or 2 . 0 mg in the morning and evening with placebo in the early and late afternoon ; the chlorpheniramine group received 4 . 0 mg four times daily .
Daily subject symptom cards were completed during a screening period to assess pretreatment symptoms and during a 4 - week treatment period while subjects received study medications .
Individual symptoms , total symptoms , and major symptoms were compared to determine efficacy of medication .
Elicited , volunteered , and observed adverse experiences were recorded for each subject and compared among groups .
Vital signs , body weights , serum chemistry values , complete blood cell counts , urine studies , and electrocardiograms were obtained for each subject and compared among groups .
Symptoms relief in the group receiving the highest concentration of azelastine ( 2 . 0 mg twice daily ) was statistically greater than in the placebo group during all weeks of the study .
Lower doses of azelastine were statistically more effective than placebo only during portions of the first 3 weeks of the study .
In contrast , although the chlorpheniramine group did have fewer symptoms than the placebo group during the study , the difference never reached statistical significance during any week of the study .
There were no serious side effects in any of the treatment groups .
Drowsiness and altered taste perception were increased significantly over placebo only in the high - dose azelastine group .
Azelastine appears to be a safe , efficacious medication for seasonal allergic rhinitis .