Effects of ouabain on myocardial oxygen supply and demand in patients with chronic coronary artery disease .
A hemodynamic , volumetric , and metabolic study in patients without heart failure .
The effects of digitalis glycosides on myocardial oxygen supply and demand are of particular interest in the presence of obstructive coronary artery disease , but have not been measured previously in man .
We assessed the effects of ouabain ( 0 . 015 mg / kg body weight ) on hemodynamic , volumetric , and metabolic parameters in 11 patients with severe chronic coronary artery disease without clinical congestive heart failure .
Because the protocol was long and involved interventions which might affect the determinations , we also studied in nine patients using an identical protocol except that ouabain administration was omitted .
Left ventricular end - diastolic pressure and left ventricular end - diastolic volume fell in each patient given ouabain , even though they were initially elevated in only two patients .
Left ventricular end - diastolic pressure fell from 11 . 5 + / - 1 . 4 ( mean + / - SE ) to 5 . 6 + / - 0 . 9 mm Hg ( P less than 0 . 001 ) and left ventricular end - diastolic volume fell from 100 + / - 17 to 82 + / - 12 ml / m2 ( P less than 0 . 01 ) 1 h after ouabain infusion was completed .
The maximum velocity of contractile element shortening increased from 1 . 68 + / - 0 . 11 ml / s to 2 . 18 + / - 0 . 21 muscle - lengths / s ( P less than 0 . 05 ) and is consistent with an increase in contractility .
No significant change in these parameters occurred in the control patients .
No significant change in myocardial oxygen consumption occurred after ouabain administration but this may be related to a greater decrease in mean arterial pressure in the ouabain patients than in the control patients .
We conclude that in patients with chronic coronary artery disease who are not in clinical congestive heart failure left ventricular end - diastolic volume falls after ouabain administration even when it is initially normal .
Though this fall would be associated with a decrease in wall tension , and , therefore , of myocardial oxygen consumption , it may not be of sufficient magnitude to prevent a net increase in myocardial oxygen consumption .
Nevertheless , compensatory mechanisms prevent a deterioration of resting myocardial metabolism .