Valsartan , a new angiotensin II antagonist for the treatment of essential hypertension : a comparative study of the efficacy and safety against amlodipine .
OBJECTIVE : To compare the antihypertensive efficacy of a new angiotensin II antagonist , valsartan , with a reference therapy , amlodipine .
METHODS : One hundred sixty - eight adult outpatients with mild to moderate hypertension were randomly allocated in double - blind fashion and equal number to receive 80 mg valsartan or 5 mg amlodipine for 12 weeks .
After 8 weeks of therapy , in patients whose blood pressure remained uncontrolled , 5 mg amlodipine was added to the initial therapy .
Patients were assessed at 4 , 8 , and 12 weeks .
The primary efficacy variable was change from baseline in mean sitting diastolic blood pressure at 8 weeks .
Secondary variables included change in sitting systolic blood pressure and responder rates .
RESULTS : Both valsartan and amlodipine were effective at lowering blood pressure at 4 , 8 , and 12 weeks .
Similar decreases were observed in both groups , with no statistically significant differences between the groups for any variable analyzed .
For the primary variable the difference was 0 . 5 mm Hg in favor of valsartan ( p = 0 . 68 ; 95 % confidence interval , - 2 . 7 to 1 . 7 ) .
Responder rates at 8 weeks were 66 . 7 % for valsartan and 60 . 2 % for amlodipine ( p = 0 . 39 ) .
Both treatments were well tolerated .
The incidence of drug - related dependent edema was somewhat higher in the amlodipine group , particularly at a dose of 10 mg per day ( 2 . 4 % for 80 mg valsartan ; 3 . 6 % for 5 mg amlodipine ; 0 % for valsartan plus 5 mg amlodipine ; 14 . 3 % for 10 mg amlodipine ) .
CONCLUSIONS : The data show that valsartan is at least as effective as amlodipine in the treatment of mild to moderate hypertension .
The results also show valsartan to be well tolerated and suggest that it is not associated with side effects characteristic of this comparator class , dihydropyridine calcium antagonists .