Gemcitabine plus vinorelbine in nonsmall cell lung carcinoma patients age 70 years or older or patients who cannot receive cisplatin.
Oncopaz Cooperative Group.
BACKGROUND: Although the prevalence of nonsmall cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) is high among elderly patients, few data are available regarding the efficacy and toxicity of chemotherapy in this group of patients.
Recent reports indicate that single agent therapy with vinorelbine (VNB) or gemcitabine (GEM) may obtain a response rate of 20-30% in elderly patients, with acceptable toxicity and improvement in symptoms and quality of life.
In the current study the efficacy and toxicity of the combination of GEM and VNB in elderly patients with advanced NSCLC or those with some contraindication to receiving cisplatin were assessed.
METHODS: Forty-nine patients with advanced NSCLC were included, 38 of whom were age >/= 70 years and 11 were age < 70 years but who had some contraindication to receiving cisplatin.
All patients were evaluable for response and toxicity.
Treatment was comprised of VNB, 25 mg/m(2), plus GEM, 1000 mg/m(2), both on Days 1, 8, and 15 every 28 days.
Patients received a minimum of three courses unless progressive disease was detected.
RESULTS: One hundred sixty-five courses were administered, with a median of 3.
6 courses per patient.
The overall response rate was 26% (95% confidence interval, 15-41%).
Two patients attained a complete response (4%) and 11 patients (22%) achieved a partial response.
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status improved in 35% of those patients with an initial value > 0, whereas relief of at least 1 symptom without worsening of other symptoms was noted in 27 patients (55%).
The median time to progression was 16 weeks and the 1-year survival rate was 33%.
Toxicity was mild.
Six patients (12%) had World Health Organization Grade 3-4 neutropenia, 2 patients (4%) had Grade 3-4 thrombocytopenia, and 2 patients (4%) had Grade 3 neurotoxicity.
Three patients with severe neutropenia (6%) died of sepsis.
The median age of those patients developing Grade 3-4 neutropenia was significantly higher than that of the remaining patients (75 years vs. 72 years; P = 0.047).
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of GEM and VNB is moderately active and well tolerated except in patients age >/= 75 years.
This age group had an increased risk of myelosuppression.
Therefore the prophylactic use of granulocyte-colony stimulating factor should be considered with this treatment.
New chemotherapy combinations with higher activity and lower toxicity are needed for elderly patients with advanced NSCLC.