Hemolysis of human erythrocytes induced by tamoxifen is related to disruption of membrane structure .
Tamoxifen ( TAM ) , the antiestrogenic drug most widely prescribed in the chemotherapy of breast cancer , induces changes in normal discoid shape of erythrocytes and hemolytic anemia .
This work evaluates the effects of TAM on isolated human erythrocytes , attempting to identify the underlying mechanisms on TAM - induced hemolytic anemia and the involvement of biomembranes in its cytostatic action mechanisms .
TAM induces hemolysis of erythrocytes as a function of concentration .
The extension of hemolysis is variable with erythrocyte samples , but 12 . 5 microM TAM induces total hemolysis of all tested suspensions .
Despite inducing extensive erythrocyte lysis , TAM does not shift the osmotic fragility curves of erythrocytes .
The hemolytic effect of TAM is prevented by low concentrations of alpha - tocopherol ( alpha - T ) and alpha - tocopherol acetate ( alpha - TAc ) ( inactivated functional hydroxyl ) indicating that TAM - induced hemolysis is not related to oxidative membrane damage .
This was further evidenced by absence of oxygen consumption and hemoglobin oxidation both determined in parallel with TAM - induced hemolysis .
Furthermore , it was observed that TAM inhibits the peroxidation of human erythrocytes induced by AAPH , thus ruling out TAM - induced cell oxidative stress .
Hemolysis caused by TAM was not preceded by the leakage of K ( + ) from the cells , also excluding a colloid - osmotic type mechanism of hemolysis , according to the effects on osmotic fragility curves .
However , TAM induces release of peripheral proteins of membrane - cytoskeleton and cytosol proteins essentially bound to band 3 .
Either alpha - T or alpha - TAc increases membrane packing and prevents TAM partition into model membranes .
These effects suggest that the protection from hemolysis by tocopherols is related to a decreased TAM incorporation in condensed membranes and the structural damage of the erythrocyte membrane is consequently avoided .
Therefore , TAM - induced hemolysis results from a structural perturbation of red cell membrane , leading to changes in the framework of the erythrocyte membrane and its cytoskeleton caused by its high partition in the membrane .
These defects explain the abnormal erythrocyte shape and decreased mechanical stability promoted by TAM , resulting in hemolytic anemia .
Additionally , since membrane leakage is a final stage of cytotoxicity , the disruption of the structural characteristics of biomembranes by TAM may contribute to the multiple mechanisms of its anticancer action .