Analgesic effect of intravenous ketamine in cancer patients on morphine therapy : a randomized , controlled , double - blind , crossover , double - dose study .
Pain not responsive to morphine is often problematic .
Animal and clinical studies have suggested that N - methyl - D - aspartate ( NMDA ) antagonists , such as ketamine , may be effective in improving opioid analgesia in difficult pain syndromes , such as neuropathic pain .
A slow bolus of subhypnotic doses of ketamine ( 0 . 25 mg / kg or 0 . 50 mg / kg ) was given to 10 cancer patients whose pain was unrelieved by morphine in a randomized , double - blind , crossover , double - dose study .
Pain intensity on a 0 to 10 numerical scale ; nausea and vomiting , drowsiness , confusion , and dry mouth , using a scale from 0 to 3 ( not at all , slight , a lot , awful ) ; Mini - Mental State Examination ( MMSE ) ( 0 - 30 ) ; and arterial pressure were recorded before administration of drugs ( T0 ) and after 30 minutes ( T30 ) , 60 minutes ( T60 ) , 120 minutes ( T120 ) , and 180 minutes ( T180 ) .
Ketamine , but not saline solution , significantly reduced the pain intensity in almost all the patients at both doses .
This effect was more relevant in patients treated with higher doses .
Hallucinations occurred in 4 patients , and an unpleasant sensation ( " empty head " ) was also reported by 2 patients .
These episodes reversed after the administration of diazepam 1 mg intravenously .
Significant increases in drowsiness were reported in patients treated with ketamine in both groups and were more marked with ketamine 0 . 50 mg / kg .
A significant difference in MMSE was observed at T30 in patients who received 0 . 50 mg / kg of ketamine .
Ketamine can improve morphine analgesia in difficult pain syndromes , such as neuropathic pain .
However , the occurrence of central adverse effects should be taken into account , especially when using higher doses .
This observation should be tested in studies of prolonged ketamine administration .