The relationship between hippocampal acetylcholine release and cholinergic convulsant sensitivity in withdrawal seizure - prone and withdrawal seizure - resistant selected mouse lines .
BACKGROUND : The septo - hippocampal cholinergic pathway has been implicated in epileptogenesis , and genetic factors influence the response to cholinergic agents , but limited data are available on cholinergic involvement in alcohol withdrawal severity .
Thus , the relationship between cholinergic activity and responsiveness and alcohol withdrawal was investigated in a genetic animal model of ethanol withdrawal severity .
METHODS : Cholinergic convulsant sensitivity was examined in alcohol - na ve Withdrawal Seizure - Prone ( WSP ) and - Resistant ( WSR ) mice .
Animals were administered nicotine , carbachol , or neostigmine via timed tail vein infusion , and the latencies to onset of tremor and clonus were recorded and converted to threshold dose .
We also used microdialysis to measure basal and potassium - stimulated acetylcholine ( ACh ) release in the CA1 region of the hippocampus .
Potassium was applied by reverse dialysis twice , separated by 75 min .
Hippocampal ACh also was measured during testing for handling - induced convulsions .
RESULTS : Sensitivity to several convulsion endpoints induced by nicotine , carbachol , and neostigmine were significantly greater in WSR versus WSP mice .
In microdialysis experiments , the lines did not differ in basal release of ACh , and 50 mM KCl increased ACh output in both lines of mice .
However , the increase in release of ACh produced by the first application of KCl was 2 - fold higher in WSP versus WSR mice .
When hippocampal ACh was measured during testing for handling - induced convulsions , extracellular ACh was significantly elevated ( 192 % ) in WSP mice , but was nonsignificantly elevated ( 59 % ) in WSR mice .
CONCLUSIONS : These results suggest that differences in cholinergic activity and postsynaptic sensitivity to cholinergic convulsants may be associated with ethanol withdrawal severity and implicate cholinergic mechanisms in alcohol withdrawal .
Specifically , WSP mice may have lower sensitivity to cholinergic convulsants compared with WSR because of postsynaptic receptor desensitization brought on by higher activity of cholinergic neurons .