Kidney function and morphology after short - term combination therapy with cyclosporine A , tacrolimus and sirolimus in the rat .
BACKGROUND : Sirolimus ( SRL ) may supplement calcineurin inhibitors in clinical organ transplantation .
These are nephrotoxic , but SRL seems to act differently displaying only minor nephrotoxic effects , although this question is still open .
In a number of treatment protocols where SRL was combined with a calcineurin inhibitor indications of a synergistic nephrotoxic effect were described .
The aim of this study was to examine further the renal function , including morphological analysis of the kidneys of male Sprague - Dawley rats treated with either cyclosporine A ( CsA ) , tacrolimus ( FK506 ) or SRL as monotherapies or in different combinations .
METHODS : For a period of 2 weeks , CsA 15 mg / kg / day ( given orally ) , FK506 3 . 0 mg / kg / day ( given orally ) or SRL 0 . 4 mg / kg / day ( given intraperitoneally ) was administered once a day as these doses have earlier been found to achieve a significant immunosuppressive effect in Sprague - Dawley rats .
In the ' conscious catheterized rat ' model , the glomerular filtration rate ( GFR ) was measured as the clearance of Cr ( EDTA ) .
The morphological analysis of the kidneys included a semi - quantitative scoring system analysing the degree of striped fibrosis , subcapsular fibrosis and the number of basophilic tubules , plus an additional stereological analysis of the total grade of fibrosis in the cortex stained with Sirius Red .
RESULTS : CsA , FK506 and SRL all significantly decreased the GFR .
A further deterioration was seen when CsA was combined with either FK506 or SRL , whereas the GFR remained unchanged in the group treated with FK506 plus SRL when compared with treatment with any of the single substances .
The morphological changes presented a similar pattern .
The semi - quantitative scoring was significantly worst in the group treated with CsA plus SRL ( P < 0 . 001 compared with controls ) and the analysis of the total grade of fibrosis also showed the highest proportion in the same group and was significantly different from controls ( P < 0 . 02 ) .
The FK506 plus SRL combination showed only a marginally higher degree of fibrosis as compared with controls ( P = 0 . 05 ) .
CONCLUSION : This rat study demonstrated a synergistic nephrotoxic effect of CsA plus SRL , whereas FK506 plus SRL was better tolerated .