Comparison of developmental toxicity of selective and non - selective cyclooxygenase - 2 inhibitors in CRL : ( WI ) WUBR Wistar rats - - DFU and piroxicam study .
BACKGROUND : Cyclooxygenase ( COX ) inhibitors are one of the most often ingested drugs during pregnancy .
Unlike general toxicity data , their prenatal toxic effects were not extensively studied before .
The aim of the experiment was to evaluate the developmental toxicity of the non - selective ( piroxicam ) and selective ( DFU ; 5 , 5 - dimethyl - 3 - ( 3 - fluorophenyl ) - 4 - ( 4 - methylsulphonyl ) phenyl - 2 ( 5H ) - furanon ) COX - 2 inhibitors .
METHODS : Drugs were separately , orally once daily dosed to pregnant rats from day 8 to 21 ( GD1 = plug day ) .
Doses were set at 0 . 3 , 3 . 0 and 30 . 0mg / kg for piroxicam and 0 . 2 , 2 . 0 and 20 . 0mg / kg for DFU .
Fetuses were delivered on GD 21 and routinely examined .
Comprehensive clinical and developmental measurements were done .
The pooled statistical analysis for ventricular septal ( VSD ) and midline ( MD ) defects was performed for rat fetuses exposed to piroxicam , selective and non - selective COX - 2 inhibitor based on present and historic data .
RESULTS : Maternal toxicity , intrauterine growth retardation , and increase of external and skeletal variations were found in rats treated with the highest dose of piroxicam .
Decrease of fetal length was the only signs of the DFU developmental toxicity observed in pups exposed to the highest compound dose .
Lack of teratogenicity was found in piroxicam and DFU - exposed groups .
Prenatal exposure to non - selective COX inhibitors increases the risk of VSD and MD when compared to historic control but not with selective COX - 2 inhibitors .
CONCLUSION : Both selective and non - selective COX - 2 inhibitors were toxic for rats fetuses when administered in the highest dose .
Unlike DFU , piroxicam was also highly toxic to the dams .
Prenatal exposure to selective COX - 2 inhibitors does not increase the risk of ventricular septal and midline defects in rat when compared to non - selective drugs and historic control .