Mutations associated with lamivudine - resistance in therapy - na ve hepatitis B virus ( HBV ) infected patients with and without HIV co - infection : implications for antiretroviral therapy in HBV and HIV co - infected South African patients .
This was an exploratory study to investigate lamivudine - resistant hepatitis B virus ( HBV ) strains in selected lamivudine - na ve HBV carriers with and without human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) co - infection in South African patients .
Thirty - five lamivudine - na ve HBV infected patients with or without HIV co - infection were studied : 15 chronic HBV mono - infected patients and 20 HBV - HIV co - infected patients .
The latter group was further sub - divided into 13 occult HBV ( HBsAg - negative ) and 7 overt HBV ( HBsAg - positive ) patients .
HBsAg , anti - HBs , anti - HBc , and anti - HIV 1 / 2 were determined as part of routine diagnosis using Axsym assays ( Abbott Laboratories , North Chicago , IL ) .
Serum samples were PCR amplified with HBV reverse transcriptase ( RT ) primers , followed by direct sequencing across the tyrosine - methionine - aspartate - aspartate ( YMDD ) motif of the major catalytic region in the C domain of the HBV RT enzyme .
HBV viral load was performed with Amplicor HBV Monitor test v2 . 0 ( Roche Diagnostics , Penzberg , Germany ) .
HBV lamivudine - resistant strains were detected in 3 of 15 mono - infected chronic hepatitis B patients and 10 of 20 HBV - HIV co - infected patients .
To the best of our knowledge , this constitutes the first report of HBV lamivudine - resistant strains in therapy - na ve HBV - HIV co - infected patients .
The HBV viral loads for mono - infected and co - infected patients ranged from 3 . 32 x 10 ( 2 ) to 3 . 82 x 10 ( 7 ) and < 200 to 4 . 40 x 10 ( 3 ) copies / ml , respectively .
It remains to be seen whether such pre - existing antiviral mutations could result in widespread emergence of HBV resistant strains when lamivudine - containing highly active antiretroviral ( ARV ) treatment ( HAART ) regimens become widely applied in South Africa , as this is likely to have potential implications in the management of HBV - HIV co - infected patients .