Estrogen prevents cholesteryl ester accumulation in macrophages induced by the HIV protease inhibitor ritonavir .
Individuals with HIV can now live long lives with drug therapy that often includes protease inhibitors such as ritonavir .
Many patients , however , develop negative long - term side effects such as premature atherosclerosis .
We have previously demonstrated that ritonavir treatment increases atherosclerotic lesion formation in male mice to a greater extent than in female mice .
Furthermore , peripheral blood monocytes isolated from ritonavir - treated females had less cholesteryl ester accumulation .
In the present study , we have investigated the molecular mechanisms by which female hormones influence cholesterol metabolism in macrophages in response to the HIV protease inhibitor ritonavir .
We have utilized the human monocyte cell line , THP - 1 as a model to address this question .
Briefly , cells were differentiated for 72 h with 100 nM PMA to obtain a macrophage - like phenotype in the presence or absence of 1 nM 17beta - estradiol ( E2 ) , 100 nM progesterone or vehicle ( 0 . 01 % ethanol ) .
Cells were then treated with 30 ng / ml ritonavir or vehicle in the presence of aggregated LDL for 24 h .
Cell extracts were harvested , and lipid or total RNA was isolated .
E2 decreased the accumulation of cholesteryl esters in macrophages following ritonavir treatment .
Ritonavir increased the expression of the scavenger receptor , CD36 mRNA , responsible for the uptake of LDL .
Additionally , ritonavir treatment selectively increased the relative levels of PPARgamma mRNA , a transcription factor responsible for the regulation of CD36 mRNA expression .
Treatment with E2 , however , failed to prevent these increases at the mRNA level .
E2 did , however , significantly suppress CD36 protein levels as measured by fluorescent immunocytochemistry .
This data suggests that E2 modifies the expression of CD36 at the level of protein expression in monocyte - derived macrophages resulting in reduced cholesteryl ester accumulation following ritonavir treatment .