Acute hepatitis attack after exposure to telithromycin .
INTRODUCTION : Antibiotic - associated hepatotoxicity is rare .
With widespread use of antimicrobial agents , however , hepatic injury occurs frequently , and among adverse drug reactions , idiosyncratic reactions are the most serious .
CASE SUMMARY : A 25 - year - old male patient , with a height of 175 cm and weight of 72 kg presented to Marmara University Hospital Emergency Department , Istanbul , Turkey , with 5 days ' history of jaundice , malaise , nausea , and vomiting .
He had been prescribed telithromycin 400 mg / d PO to treat an upper respiratory tract infection 7 days prior .
Admission laboratory tests were as follows : alanine aminotransferase , 67 U / L ( reference range , 10 - 37 U / L ) ; aspartate aminotransferase , 98 U / L ( 10 - 40 U / L ) ; alkaline phosphatase , 513 U / L ( 0 - 270 U / L ) ; gamma - glutamyltransferase , 32 U / L ( 7 - 49 U / L ) ; amylase , 46 U / L ( 0 - 220 U / L ) ; total bilirubin , 20 . 1 mg / dL ( 0 . 2 - 1 . 0 mg / dL ) ; direct bilirubin , 14 . 8 mg / dL ( 0 - 0 . 3 mg / dL ) ; and albumin , 4 . 7 mg / dL ( 3 . 5 - 5 . 4 mg / dL ) .
No toxin , alcohol , or other drugs were reported .
The patient had suffered a previous episode of " acute hepatitis of unknown origin , " that occurred after telithromycin usage .
Both incidents occurred within a year .
DISCUSSION : Telithromycin is the first of the ketolide antibacterials to receive US Food and Drug Administration approval for clinical use .
It has been associated with infrequent and usually reversible severe hepatic dysfunction .
Based on a score of 8 on the Naranjo adverse drug reaction probability scale , telithromycin was the probable cause of acute hepatitis in this patient , and pathological findings suggested drug - induced toxic hepatitis .
Recurrence of hepatitis attack might have been avoided if the initial incident had been communicated to the attending physician who prescribed telithromycin the second time .
CONCLUSION : Here we report a case of acute hepatitis probably associated with the administration of telithromycin .