Hypothalamic prolactin receptor messenger ribonucleic acid levels , prolactin signaling , and hyperprolactinemic inhibition of pulsatile luteinizing hormone secretion are dependent on estradiol .
Hyperprolactinemia can reduce fertility and libido .
Although central prolactin actions are thought to contribute to this , the mechanisms are poorly understood .
We first tested whether chronic hyperprolactinemia inhibited two neuroendocrine parameters necessary for female fertility : pulsatile LH secretion and the estrogen - induced LH surge .
Chronic hyperprolactinemia induced by the dopamine antagonist sulpiride caused a 40 % reduction LH pulse frequency in ovariectomized rats , but only in the presence of chronic low levels of estradiol .
Sulpiride did not affect the magnitude of a steroid - induced LH surge or the percentage of GnRH neurons activated during the surge .
Estradiol is known to influence expression of the long form of prolactin receptors ( PRL - R ) and components of prolactin 's signaling pathway .
To test the hypothesis that estrogen increases PRL - R expression and sensitivity to prolactin , we next demonstrated that estradiol greatly augments prolactin - induced STAT5 activation .
Lastly , we measured PRL - R and suppressor of cytokine signaling ( SOCS - 1 and - 3 and CIS , which reflect the level of prolactin signaling ) mRNAs in response to sulpiride and estradiol .
Sulpiride induced only SOCS - 1 in the medial preoptic area , where GnRH neurons are regulated , but in the arcuate nucleus and choroid plexus , PRL - R , SOCS - 3 , and CIS mRNA levels were also induced .
Estradiol enhanced these effects on SOCS - 3 and CIS .
Interestingly , estradiol also induced PRL - R , SOCS - 3 , and CIS mRNA levels independently .
These data show that GnRH pulse frequency is inhibited by chronic hyperprolactinemia in a steroid - dependent manner .
They also provide evidence for estradiol - dependent and brain region - specific regulation of PRL - R expression and signaling responses by prolactin .