Omitting fentanyl reduces nausea and vomiting , without increasing pain , after sevoflurane for day surgery .
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE : Despite advantages of induction and maintenance of anaesthesia with sevoflurane , postoperative nausea and vomiting occurs frequently .
Fentanyl is a commonly used supplement that may contribute to this , although it may also improve analgesia .
METHODS : This double - blind study examined the incidence and severity of postoperative nausea and vomiting and pain in the first 24 h after sevoflurane anaesthesia in 216 adult day surgery patients .
Patients were randomly allocated to either receive or not receive 1 1 fentanyl , while a third group received dexamethasone in addition to fentanyl .
RESULTS : Omission of fentanyl did not reduce the overall incidence of postoperative nausea and vomiting , but did reduce the incidence of vomiting and / or moderate to severe nausea prior to discharge from 20 % and 17 % with fentanyl and fentanyl - dexamethasone , respectively , to 5 % ( P = 0 . 013 ) .
Antiemetic requirements were reduced from 24 % and 31 % to 7 % ( P = 0 . 0012 ) .
Dexamethasone had no significant effect on the incidence or severity of postoperative nausea and vomiting .
Combining the two fentanyl groups revealed further significant benefits from the avoidance of opioids , reducing postoperative nausea and vomiting and nausea prior to discharge from 35 % and 33 % to 22 % and 19 % ( P = 0 . 049 and P = 0 . 035 ) , respectively , while nausea in the first 24 h was decreased from 42 % to 27 % ( P = 0 . 034 ) .
Pain severity and analgesic requirements were unaffected by the omission of fentanyl .
Fentanyl did reduce minor intraoperative movement but had no sevoflurane - sparing effect and increased respiratory depression , hypotension and bradycardia .
CONCLUSION : As fentanyl exacerbated postoperative nausea and vomiting without an improvement in postoperative pain and also had adverse cardiorespiratory effects , it appears to be an unnecessary and possibly detrimental supplement to sevoflurane in day surgery .