Simvastatin - ezetimibe - induced hepatic failure necessitating liver transplantation .
Abstract Serum aminotransferase elevations are a commonly known adverse effect of 3 - hydroxy - 3 - methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase inhibitor ( statin ) therapy .
However , hepatotoxic events have not been widely published with ezetimibe or the combination agent simvastatin - ezetimibe .
We describe a 70 - year - old Hispanic woman who developed fulminant hepatic failure necessitating liver transplantation 10 weeks after conversion from simvastatin 40 mg / day to simvastatin 10 mg - ezetimibe 40 mg / day .
The patient 's lipid panel had been maintained with simvastatin for 18 months before the conversion without evidence of hepatotoxicity .
A routine laboratory work - up 10 weeks after conversion revealed elevated serum aminotransferase levels .
Simvastatinezetimibe and escitalopram ( which she was taking for depression ) were discontinued , and other potential causes of hepatotoxicity were excluded .
A repeat work - up revealed further elevations in aminotransferase levels , and liver biopsy revealed evidence of moderate - to - severe drug toxicity .
She underwent liver transplantation with an uneventful postoperative course .
Her aminotransferase levels returned to normal by postoperative day 23 , and her 2 - year follow - up showed no adverse events .
Ezetimibe undergoes extensive glucuronidation by uridine diphosphate glucoronosyltransferases ( UGT ) in the intestine and liver and may have inhibited the glucuronidation of simvastatin hydroxy acid , resulting in increased simvastatin exposure and subsequent hepatotoxicity .
To our knowledge , this is the first case report of simvastatin - ezetimibe - induced liver failure that resulted in liver transplantation .
We postulate that the mechanism of the simvastatinezetimibe - induced hepatotoxicity is the increased simvastatin exposure by ezetimibe inhibition of UGT enzymes .
Clinicians should be aware of potential hepatotoxicity with simvastatin - ezetimibe especially in elderly patients and should carefully monitor serum aminotransferase levels when starting therapy and titrating the dosage .