Clinically significant proteinuria following the administration of sirolimus to renal transplant recipients .
BACKGROUND : Sirolimus is the latest immunosuppressive agent used to prevent rejection , and may have less nephrotoxicity than calcineurin inhibitor ( CNI ) - based regimens .
To date there has been little documentation of clinically significant proteinuria linked with the use of sirolimus .
We have encountered several patients who developed substantial proteinuria associated with sirolimus use .
In each patient , the close temporal association between the commencement of sirolimus therapy and proteinuria implicated sirolimus as the most likely etiology of the proteinuria .
METHODS : We analyzed the clinical and laboratory information available for all 119 patients transplanted at the Washington Hospital Center between 1999 - 2003 for whom sirolimus was a component of their immunosuppressant regimen .
In these patients , the magnitude of proteinuria was assessed on morning urine samples by turbidometric measurement or random urine protein : creatinine ratios , an estimate of grams of proteinuria / day .
Laboratory results were compared between prior , during and following sirolimus use .
RESULTS : Twenty - eight patients ( 24 % ) developed increased proteinuria from baseline during their post - transplantation course .
In 21 patients an alternative cause of proteinuria was either obvious or insufficient data was available to be conclusive .
In 7 of the 28 patients there was a striking temporal association between the initiation of sirolimus and the development of nephrotic - range proteinuria .
Proteinuria correlated most strongly with sirolimus therapy when compared to other demographic and clinical variables .
In most patients , discontinuation of sirolimus resulted in a decrease , but not resolution , of proteinuria .
CONCLUSIONS : Sirolimus induces or aggravates pre - existing proteinuria in an unpredictable subset of renal allograft recipients .
Proteinuria may improve , but does not resolve , when sirolimus is withdrawn .