Mouse strain - dependent effect of amantadine on motility and brain biogenic amines .
The effect of amantadine hydrochloride , injected i . p .
in 6 increments of 100 mg / kg each over 30 hr , on mouse motility and whole brain content of selected biogenic amines and major metabolites was studied in 4 strains of mice .
These were the albino Sprague - Dawley ICR and BALB / C , the black C57BL / 6 and the brown CDF - I mouse strains .
Amantadine treatment produced a biphasic effect on mouse motility .
The initial dose of amantadine depressed locomotor activity in all mouse strains studied with the BALB / C mice being the most sensitive .
Subsequent amantadine treatments produced enhancement of motility from corresponding control in all mouse strains with the BALB / C mice being the least sensitive .
The locomotor activity was decreased from corresponding controls in all strains studied , except for the ICR mice , during an overnight drug - free period following the fourth amantadine treatment .
Readministration of amantadine , after a drug - free overnight period , increased motility from respective saline control in all strains with exception of the BALB / C mice where suppression of motility occurred .
Treatment with amantadine did not alter whole brain dopamine levels but decreased the amounts of 3 , 4 - dihydroxyphenylacetic acid in the BALB / C mice compared to saline control .
Conversely , brain normetanephrine concentration was increased from saline control by amantadine in the BALB / C mice .
The results suggest a strain - dependent effect of amantadine on motility and indicate a differential response to the acute and multiple dose regimens used .
The BALB / C mouse was the most sensitive strain and could serve as the strain of choice for evaluating the side effects of amantadine .
The biochemical results of brain biogenic amines of BALB / C mouse strain suggest a probable decrease of catecholamine turnover rate and / or metabolism by monoamine oxidase and a resulting increase in O - methylation of norepinephrine which may account for a behavioral depression caused by amantadine in the BALB / C mice .