Composition of gall bladder stones associated with octreotide : response to oral ursodeoxycholic acid .
Octreotide , an effective treatment for acromegaly , induces gall bladder stones in 13 - 60 % of patients .
Because knowledge of stone composition is essential for studies of their pathogenesis , treatment , and prevention , this was investigated by direct and indirect methods in 14 octreotide treated acromegalic patients with gall stones .
Chemical analysis of gall stones retrieved at cholecystectomy from two patients , showed that they contained 71 % and 87 % cholesterol by weight .
In the remaining 12 patients , localised computed tomography of the gall bladder showed that eight had stones with maximum attenuation scores of < 100 Hounsfield units ( values of < 100 HU predict cholesterol rich , dissolvable stones ) .
Gall bladder bile was obtained by ultrasound guided , fine needle puncture from six patients .
All six patients had supersaturated bile ( mean ( SEM ) cholesterol saturation index of 1 . 19 ( 0 . 08 ) ( range 1 . 01 - 1 . 53 ) ) and all had abnormally rapid cholesterol microcrystal nucleation times ( < 4 days ( range 1 - 4 ) ) , whilst in four , the bile contained cholesterol microcrystals immediately after sampling .
Of the 12 patients considered for oral ursodeoxycholic acid ( UDCA ) treatment , two had a blocked cystic duct and were not started on UDCA while one was lost to follow up .
After one year of treatment , five of the remaining nine patients showed either partial ( n = 3 ) or complete ( n = 2 ) gall stone dissolution , suggesting that their stones were cholesterol rich .
This corresponds , by actuarial ( life table ) analysis , to a combined gall stone dissolution rate of 58 . 3 ( 15 . 9 % ) .
In conclusion , octreotide induced gall stones are generally small , multiple , and cholesterol rich although , in common with spontaneous gall stone disease , at presentation some patients will have a blocked cystic duct and some gall stones containing calcium .