Immediate allergic reactions to amoxicillin .
A large group of patients with suspected allergic reactions to beta - lactam antibiotics was evaluated .
A detailed clinical history , together with skin tests , RAST ( radioallergosorbent test ) , and controlled challenge tests , was used to establish whether patients allergic to beta - lactam antibiotics had selective immediate allergic responses to amoxicillin ( AX ) or were cross - reacting with other penicillin derivatives .
Skin tests were performed with benzylpenicilloyl - poly - L - lysine ( BPO - PLL ) , benzylpenicilloate , benzylpenicillin ( PG ) , ampicillin ( AMP ) , and AX .
RAST for BPO - PLL and AX - PLL was done .
When both skin test and RAST for BPO were negative , single - blind , placebo - controlled challenge tests were done to ensure tolerance of PG or sensitivity to AX .
A total of 177 patients were diagnosed as allergic to beta - lactam antibiotics .
We selected the 54 ( 30 . 5 % ) cases of immediate AX allergy with good tolerance of PG .
Anaphylaxis was seen in 37 patients ( 69 % ) , the other 17 ( 31 % ) having urticaria and / or angioedema .
All the patients were skin test negative to BPO ; 49 of 51 ( 96 % ) were also negative to MDM , and 44 of 46 ( 96 % ) to PG .
Skin tests with AX were positive in 34 ( 63 % ) patients .
RAST was positive for AX in 22 patients ( 41 % ) and to BPO in just 5 ( 9 % ) .
None of the sera with negative RAST for AX were positive to BPO .
Challenge tests with AX were performed in 23 subjects ( 43 % ) to establish the diagnosis of immediate allergic reaction to AX , and in 15 cases ( 28 % ) both skin test and RAST for AX were negative .
PG was well tolerated by all 54 patients .
We describe the largest group of AX - allergic patients who have tolerated PG reported so far .
Diagnosis of these patients can be achieved only if specific AX - related reagents are employed .
Further studies are necessary to determine the exact extent of this problem and to improve the efficacy of diagnostic methods .